# Share a Feature Class as a Hosted Feature layer

In this exercise, users will publish the Trailhead point and Parking Lot polygon feature classes as editable hosted feature layers on AGOL or Portal. To complete this exercise, users must have successfully completed Exercise 4: Build a geodatabase.

> [!NOTE]
>
> If users are not doing exercises in linear sequence, a map package of Exercise 4’s geodatabase (MyFieldData_Ex5) can be found in the working Folder/Map Packages. To open this into current a Pro project click Insert tab > Import Map > MyFieldData_Ex5.mpx.
> In this step, users will run a tool to enable

**Estimated Completion Time: 45 min**

## STEP 1: Enable Editor Tracking

1. If necessary, open the *MyFieldData* project.

2. From the **Geoprocessing** pane, click the back button , type *Enable Editor* in the search box and select the **Enable Editor Tracking** tool. Fill out the fields based on the image below:
    <!-- Add image -->
3. Click **Run**.
4. Repeat for the **Parking Lot** layer.



## STEP 2: Choose symbols for data collection

The feature class schema is now ready for data collection. The next step is to choose the symbology that appears on the map when collecting features and then save as a feature template. For this project, use the Feature Type field to create a classification. The classification sets up the data collection workflow so while using Field Maps, the points collected will automatically be symbolized by Feature Type.
1. In the Contents pane, right-click the Trailhead_pt layer then select Symbology.
2. In the **Symbology** pane, in the **Primary** symbology drop-down list, choose **Unique Values**. In the Field 1 drop-down list, choose **Feature Type**.

   > [!TIP]
   >
   > Tip: Symbols for all the values created for the Feature Type domain are visible. If symbols are not visible, click the Add All Values button.

3. Click the More drop-down and select Format all symbols. In the Symbol Gallery search, type Trailhead and select the second icon.

   > [!NOTE]
   >
   > Ensure the symbol with the white hiker and black background is selected.
   >
   >

4. Click the back button. Click the drop-down arrow next to the color scheme color ramp box. At the bottom, click show all values . With all the values selected, change the color scheme to the Blue – Purple (6 Classes) color scheme in the middle of the drop-down scheme choices . Hover over the color schemes to see the names.

5. Click the More drop-down and uncheck Show all other values.

   > [!TIP]
   >
   > This symbology will be used later over the imagery basemap, select a color scheme that will show up against vegetation. The imagery at each park will dictate appropriate color scheme choices.

   > [!NOTE]
   >
   > By adding the NPS Symbol set to the Pro Project Styles folder (Exercise 4, Step 1), those symbols were pre-loaded and made available in the Symbology pane.

6. In the Contents pane, right-click the ParkingLots_py then select Symbology. In the Symbology pane, click the colored, square polygon button next to Symbol, select the Properties tab and change the color to Light Vert, the outline color to No Color and the outline line width to 0 pt. Click Apply at the bottom of the
   pane.

   Now verify that feature templates are present for the new symbols.

7. Click the Edit tab . In the Features group, click the icon to open the Manage Templates pane. Select the different layers to verify the correct symbology. If the symbols shown in the Manage Template pane do not match the symbols in the Contents pane, click New, and from the drop-down list, choose Templates For Layer.
8. Close the Manage Templates pane, close the Symbology pane, and Save the project.



## STEP 3: Publish editable feature layers to Portal

The Trailhead_pt and ParkingLots_py layers are ready to be published as hosted feature layers.
1. In the upper-right corner of the ArcGIS Pro window, sign in to NPS AGOL or Portal account, if not already signed in.
2. In the Contents pane, right-click Trailhead_pt, point to Sharing, and then click Share As Web Layer (the dialog box may take several seconds to open).

   > [!NOTE]
   >
   > Refer to the NPS layer naming convention guidelines and the NPS Acceptable Use >
   > Policy when publishing to ArcGIS Online or Portal.<br><br>
   Examine the information in the General tab. ArcGIS Pro filled in publishing information directly from the metadata created for the Trailhead_pt layer earlier. Configure how the Web Layer will be shared. If metadata was not recorded earlier for Trailhead_pt, the summary and tags will be blank.

3. In the Item Details section of the General tab, change the Name to PARK_TRANS_TRAINING_Trailhead_Username_pt. Use an underscore instead of spaces.

4. If metadata was not recorded earlier for Trailhead_pt, type Point feature class for collecting trailhead location data in the Summary box.

5. If metadata was not recorded earlier for Trailhead_pt, type PARK, Data Collection, Transportation, Training in the Tags box. After completing a tag entry, press the tab button on the keyboard to begin a new one.

6. In Portal, in the Data and Layer Type section, under the Copy all data sub-section, check the Feature button. Keep the remaining defaults.

7. Click the Configuration tab . Click the pencil right of the Feature layer . The Feature Properties section opens. Under Operations, check the box to Enable editing and allow editors to: add, update, and delete features. Check the box to Enable Sync and Export Data. Under Properties, keep both boxes checked. Check the Preserve editor tracking info box.

   > [!NOTE]
   >
   > * If high accuracy elevation data is required, users should uncheck Apply default to features with z-values.
   > * The Preserve editor tracking info functionality was added at ArcPro 2.5. If you do not enable Preserve editor tracking info, the disclaimer below will apply to your data.

   > [!CAUTION]
   >
   > **DISCLAIMER:** *This tool allows tracking of collected data in the field and last updated. These fields populate when the layer is published to AGOL or Portal. If the layer is re-published, these fields will be overwritten with the user and dates that match re-publishing occurred and will not show original collected data and by whom. Data is editable in ArcGIS Pro, but the data source must remain in the cloud to maintain the original editor tracking information. Be sure to turn off editor tracking before re-publishing to AGOL/Portal and leave data in the cloud and maintain local backups.*

8. Click the Configure Parameters icon within that same Configuration tab. Under Date Fields, change the time zone to current location. Check Adjust for Daylight Savings. Uncheck the Settings Ensure map is set to allow assignment of unique IDs. Leave properties value as 2000.

9. Click the Content tab . Review the publishing information on the content tab.

   > [!NOTE]
   >
   > The Trailhead_Username_pt layer will be published to the My Content root folder in AGOL or Portal. Before publishing, check for any errors or warnings.

10. At the bottom of the Share As Web Layer pane in the Content tab, click Analyze. The Message tab will report if there are errors or warnings.

    > [!NOTE]
    >
    > Publishing a web layer to AGOL/Portal is still possible even if Analysis reports a warning. If the Analysis reports an error, the error must be resolved before the layer can be published.

11. Click Publish. This can take several minutes. When the layer is successfully published, close the Share As Web Layer pane.
12. Repeat Steps 2 – 11 for the ParkingLots_py layer.
13. Save the project.
<br>
<br>
<br>
<br>
<br>
