# Create and Share a Data Collection Web Map

In this exercise, users will create a data collection web map with self-published data, national datasets, and editable hosted layers. Users will pick a basemap appropriate for offline use and configure feature pop-ups for end users. Users will also create a group in AGOL or Portal and share the map and layers within that group.

> [!NOTE]
>
> If users are not doing exercises in linear sequence, a map package of Exercise 5 (MyFieldData_Ex6) can be found in the working Folder/Map Packages. To open this into current a Pro project click Insert tab > Import Map > MyFieldData_Ex6.mpx. In order to complete Exercise 6, you will need to publish the feature classes (Trailhead_pt and ParkingLots_py) to AGOL or Portal (Exercise 5 Step 3: Publish Editable feature layers to ArcGIS Online or Portal).

**Estimated Completion Time: 1 hour**

## STEP 1: Create a new web map

1. Open a browser, if one is not already open, and navigate to NPS AGOL (nps.maps.arcgis.com) or Portal (gisportal.nps.gov/portal), and Sign-In. Click the Content tab .

2. From the My Content tab, click on your PARK_TRANS_TRAINING_ParkingLots_Username_py feature layer, then select the Open in Map Viewer drop-down.

  > [!NOTE]
  >
  > Map Viewer has been updated from a classic version to a new Beta version. Ensure you are using the Beta version called Map Viewer instead of Map Viewer Classic (top right of screen).

3. > Click Save and open, then Save As on the left black panel and enter the following information:
  > Type a title, tags, and a summary for the map or use these examples:
  > Title: PARK/TRANS/Trailhead Map – Your Name
  > Tags: PARK, data collection, transportation, training
  > Summary: Map for collecting Trailhead location data at PARK.

4. Click Save Map.

5. Click the Add button , and select Browse layers from the drop-down list.

6. Browse layers will automatically bring up feature layers hosted in My Content. Locate PARK_TRANS_TRAINING_Trailhead_Username_pt, click the Plus buttonto add it to the map.



## STEP 2: Add non-editable national boundary feature layer for reference

In this step, add the non-editable NPS Park Unit Boundaries feature layer published by the NPS Lands Resources Division. It is the authoritative boundary layer for the NPS, identifiable by the green check mark . This dataset is sync-able (offline compatible with Field Maps) but not editable. This reference layer is helpful for navigation purposes in the field.
1. Change the Search for Layers drop-down from My Content to My Organization and search for Land Resources Division Boundary and Tract Data Service. Scroll down and find the feature layer (see screenshot) created by “National Park Service.” Click the Plus button to add it to the map.
    AGOL Portal
    Figure 57: National Park Service boundary layers in ArcGIS Online and Portal.

2. Exit out of Browse layers by clicking the X to the right of the My Content drop-down. Click on Layers at the top left.

3. Click the three horizontal dots next to Nps boundary centroids, then select Remove. Repeat for the NPS tracts layer.

## STEP 3: Add editable regional trails feature layer

Next, add the sync-able and editable Intermountain Region trails feature layer to directly contribute to the regional trails feature layer. This layer is for training (a duplicate of the region-managed trails layer) so editing or adding to this layer will have no effect on regional trails data.
1. Click the Add layer button in the layers pane.

2. Change the Search for Layers drop-down from My Content to My Organization and search for “TRAINING Trails”. Add the TRAINING_Trails_ln_HOSTED (Note: that’s a lower case “l”, not an “eye”) layer published by IMR GIS.
    AGOL Portal
    Figure 58: IMR GIS-hosted “TRAINING_Trails_ln_HOSTED” feature layer published to AGOL and Portal.

  > [!NOTE]
  >
  > Two training trails layers appear in AGOL. Notice one has a later updated date and there is a red crossed circle , indicating that this data has been deprecated and is no longer authoritative or updated. Do not use any deprecated datasets for your field data collection projects.

3. Click the Back button next to the Add layer to return to the Layers pane.
     The Contents pane now includes the Trails, Park Unit Boundaries, Trailheads, and Parking Lots feature layers above the topographic basemap.

4. Hover over the TRAINING_Trails_ln_HOSTED layer and click the 3 horizontal dots below. Select Rename and rename it “Trails”. Click OK.

5. Rename NPS – Land Resources Division Boundary and Tract Data Service – nps boundary layer as “Boundary”, PARK_TRANS_TRAINING_Trailhead_Username_pt as “Trailhead”, and PARK_TRANS_TRAINING_ParkingLots_Username _py as “Parking Lot”.

6. Hover over the Boundary layer and select the 3 vertical dots (ellipsis) to the left of the feature layer name. Drag the Boundary layer below Parking Lot and above Topographic. Drag the Trailhead layer above the Trails layer.
    Mobile Data Collection Training Lakewood Regional Office
    doimspp.sharepoint.com/sites/nps-imr-geographic-resources Geographic Resources Division
    May 2022 Page 50
    Figure 59: Layers list in AGOL or Portal Map Viewer

7. Zoom to your current location.

8. Click the Save and open icon on the left and Save the map (not save as).



## STEP 4: Select Basemaps
1. In the Map Viewer, click Add at the top left and select Browse Layers .

2. If using Portal, skip to step 4. Change the drop-down to ArcGIS Online . Search for Basemaps for Export. Scroll down and click on World Imagery (for Export) by Esri. Then click Use as basemap.

3. Open the Basemap pane . Click Add layer . Ensure drop- down is still ArcGIS Online and search for Basemaps for Export. Click on World Topographic Map (for Export) by Esri. Click Add layer to basemap. Click the back button . Now both basemaps are added to your basemaps pane.
    Figure 60: “World Imagery (for Export)” and “World Topographic Map (for Export)” basemap layer published by ESRI.
    Mobile Data Collection Training Lakewood Regional Office
    doimspp.sharepoint.com/sites/nps-imr-geographic-resources Geographic Resources Division
    May 2022 Page 51

  > [!NOTE]
  >
  > Notice these basemaps were published by Esri and were designed to take offline and are maintained routinely.

4. Change the drop-down to My Organization . Search for “Basemaps for Export.” Scroll down and click on World Imagery (for Export) by NPGAdmin. Then click Use as basemap.

5. Open the Basemap pane . Click Add layer . Ensure drop- down is still My Organization and search for Basemaps for Export. Click on World Topographic Map (for Export) by NPGAdmin. Click Add layer to basemap. Click the back button . Now both basemaps are added to your basemaps pane.
    Figure 61: “World Imagery (for Export)” and “World Topographic Map (for Export)” basemap layer published by NPGAdmin.

  > [!NOTE]
  >
  > Notice these basemaps were published by NPGAdmin and were designed to take offline and are maintained routinely.

6. Hover over World Topographic Map (for Export) then click on the ellipsis and select Rename. Rename the layer “Topo”. Rename the World Imagery (for Export) to Imagery.

7. Click the pencil at the top right of the Basemap Pane. Rename the layer to Export Basemaps. Click OK. Click the back button . Click the Layers Pane to return to the layer list.

8. Zoom to your current location and Save the map.

## STEP 5: Add bookmarks

1. Pan and zoom to an area at your current location or where data collection will be conducted for the training.
   Mobile Data Collection Training Lakewood Regional Office
     doimspp.sharepoint.com/sites/nps-imr-geographic-resources Geographic Resources Division
     May 2022 Page 52

2. Click the Bookmarks button then click Add Bookmark. Name the Bookmark to something meaningful, such as feature at zoomed in location or name of area. Click Add.

3. Repeat steps 1 and 2 as needed for multiple areas you’d like to easily zoom to.

4. Close the drop-down when the bookmarks are completed .

5. Zoom to the maps initial extent by clicking the home button.

6. Save the map.

## STEP 6: Configure the pop-ups for data collection

1. In the Layers pane, turn off the Parking Lot layer by clicking the “eye” icon in the Parking Lot layer.

2. Click the Trailhead layer and the properties pane appears. On the right, click the Configure pop-ups tool .

3. In the Configure pop-Ups pane, find the Add content button at the bottom: and click it. Then click the Fields list item under the Content list.

4. Click the Select fields link in the Configure Pop-ups window. Uncheck everything except Feature Name, Feature Type, Public Display and Notes. Click Done.

   > [!NOTE]
   >
   > Notice that there are now two Fields list, one with everything turned on and another for what you configured previously. This way you can have multiple pop-up configurations per layer.

5. Click the Trails layer in the Layers pane. Click Configure pop-ups.

6. Click the Select fields link in the Configure Pop-ups window. Uncheck everything except Name, Feature Type, Status, Type, Class, Use, Surface, Public Display, and Notes. Click Done.

7. Click the Parking Lots layer in the Layers pane. Click Configure pop-ups.

8. Click the Select fields link in the Configure Pop-ups window. uncheck everything except Lot Name, Lot Type, Public Display, Surface, Spaces, and Notes. Move the fields around so Surface is above Public Display but below Lot Type. Repeat this for the Spaces field.
        Mobile Data Collection Training Lakewood Regional Office
        doimspp.sharepoint.com/sites/nps-imr-geographic-resources Geographic Resources Division
        May 2022 Page 53

9. Click the Nps boundary layer under the National park Service Land Resources Division Tract and Boundary Services group. Click Configure pop-ups. Turn off Enable pop-ups to remove pop-ups for this layer.
   
    > [!TIP]
    >
    > Since the boundary layer is being used only for visual reference, turning off pop-up helps field workers from not selecting a pop-up by accident.
    
10. Save the map.

## STEP 7: Configure the search layer
In this step, users will set up the search functionality on the Trailhead feature layer for field searches. This is useful for quickly navigating to new locations.

> [!NOTE]
>
> To utilize this functionality, users must own the web map.

1. Click the three lines at the top left of ArcGIS Online (or Portal) and select Content.
2. From the My Content tab of the Content page, click on the PARK/TRANS/Trailhead Map – Your Name web map.

3. Click the Settings tab.

4. Scroll down the Offline Mode section and verify the Enable offline mode box is checked (or turned on).

   > [!NOTE]
   >
   > If Enable Offline mode is not appearing, this means either the basemap or one of the feature layers is not enabled for offline functionality. Review the details of each feature layer and basemap to ensure they are all enabled for offline use.

6. Scroll down to the Application Settings subsection within the Web Map section. Expand the Enable Search setting, check the By Layer box and uncheck the By Address box.

7. Change the Hint text from Place or Address to Park Unit Code.

8. Click Add Layer.

9. Choose the Parking Lot layer from the first drop-down menu.
        Mobile Data Collection Training Lakewood Regional Office
        doimspp.sharepoint.com/sites/nps-imr-geographic-resources Geographic Resources Division
        May 2022 Page 54    
    
   > [!NOTE]
   >
   > Hosted feature layers with Query enabled are searchable and appear in the drop-down menu. If publishing feature data from ArcMap, users can enable the Query operation through the Service Editor.
   
10. Choose the Unit Code field from the second drop-down menu.

11. Ensure the final column is set to Contains.

12. Verify Use in ArcGIS Collector AND ArcGIS Field Maps Mobile are both checked (or turned on).
      Figure 62: Configuring the Application settings of the web map includes enabling map users to find their locations based on a feature layer’s available park unit code.

13. Click Save.
      The map’s feature search is now enabled. The search box at the top of the Map Viewer can be used to locate features by Unit Code in the Parking Lots layer. Click the drop-down arrow in the search box and choose the Parking Lots layer. The hint text provided will be displayed in the search box. Typing the Unit Code will zoom the map to the feature(s) and display the pop-up with available attribute information.

## STEP 8: Edit web map overview details

1. Scroll to the top of the Map Information page and select the Overview tab .

2. Click Edit Thumbnail .
        Mobile Data Collection Training Lakewood Regional Office
        doimspp.sharepoint.com/sites/nps-imr-geographic-resources Geographic Resources Division
        May 2022 Page 55

3. Click Browse. Navigate to the working folder/Images folder and select Trailhead Webmap.png. Adjust the zoom to maximize the icon. Click OK.

4. In the Description section, click the Edit button . Type “This web map is designed for collecting geospatial data while conducting a Trailhead location survey.” In the Edit Description box. Click Save .

5. Scroll down to edit the Terms of Use. Type “For internal use only.” In the Edit Terms of Use box. Click Save.

6. Edit the Credits (Attribution) in the bottom right of the screen. Fill in the credits with your branch, division, Park name, National Park Service. Click Save.
## STEP 9: Create and invite users to an ArcGIS Online / Portal group
Create a group to share a map and its layers with others. In this step, users will create a group and add members to allow data collection by multiple users in the field using the previously designed web map.

1. At the top of the screen, click Groups.

2.  Click the Create Group button .

3. In the Create new group screen, select Upload Thumbnail. Click the Choose File button. Navigate to the working folder/Images folder and select Trailhead.png. Adjust the zoom to maximize the icon. Click OK.

4.. Type a group name, summary, and tags for the group or use these examples:
         Group Name: PARK GNSS Data Collection – Your Name
         Summary: Field data collection group
         Tags: PARK, data collection, transportation, training

5.. Choose these group membership settings:
         Mobile Data Collection Training Lakewood Regional Office
         doimspp.sharepoint.com/sites/nps-imr-geographic-resources Geographic Resources Division
         May 2022 Page 56
         Who can view this group?
         All organization members
         Who can be in this group?
         My organization’s members only
         How can people join this group?
         By request
         Who can contribute content?
         Group owner and managers
         Table 2: Group membership settings selected upon creation of a new group.

6.. Click Save.

7. Click Invite Users .

8. In the Search Users box at the top, enter the last name of a user to be added to the group. Locate them within the Users box and click their name.

    > [!NOTE]
    >
    > Only users who have activated NPS AGOL or Portal accounts are available to be added to groups.

9. Confirm that the box in the bottom left is checked to Add organization members without requiring confirmation and click Add members to group.

10. In the Description box of the Group page, click the Edit button. In the Edit Description box, enter “Web maps and feature layers for collecting Trailhead location data at PARK”. Click Save.

## STEP 10: Share data collection map with the group
Now users will share the PARK/TRANS/Trailhead Map – Your name and Trailhead layer with the PARK GNSS Data Collection group.

1. At the top of the page, click Content .

    > [!NOTE]
    >
    > “Content” refers to the content that a user owns or has created. “Group Content” refers to content shared within a group.

18. Find the PARK/TRANS/Trailhead Map – named web map created earlier. The web map and feature layer have icons indicating that they are unshared. Skip to #6 if using Portal.

19. On ArcGIS Online, in the row for the PARK/TRANS/Trailhead Map – your name, click the person icon . This shows the sharing level of the item, currently set to only the Owner.
         Mobile Data Collection Training Lakewood Regional Office
         doimspp.sharepoint.com/sites/nps-imr-geographic-resources Geographic Resources Division
         May 2022 Page 57

20. Under Set group sharing, click Edit group sharing and check the box next to PARK GNSS Data Collection – Your name group created in the last step. Click OK. Click Update when the Update Sharing dialog box appears.
         Figure 63: Thumbnail for the PARK GNSS Data Collection - Your Name webmap to update sharing options for the newly created group.

    > [!NOTE]
    >
    > As the owner of PARK_TRANS_TRAINING_Trailhead_username_pt and PARK_TRANS_TRAINING_ParkingLots_py feature services, users can share them. Since IMR GIS is the owner of the TRAINING_Trails_ln feature layer, only IMR GIS can determine sharing of that feature layer. This exercise demonstrates the process for creating and sharing in groups, and as no additional participants will be collecting in the group created, IMRGIS will not share the Trails feature layer beyond its current settings. Because users have been added to the 2021 training group, users can view and edit the Trails feature layer in upcoming exercises.

21. If using AGOL, skip to #10.

22. On Portal, in the row for the PARK/TRANS/Trailhead Map – your name, click the lock icon . If the user is a member of a collaborative group, select Access from the drop-down. Otherwise, click the lock icon to bring up the Share dialog box.

23. In the Share dialog box, under These Groups, check the box next to the PARK GNSS Data Collection – Your name group that was created in the last step.
         Figure 64: Portal groups added that can see the PARK GNSS Data Collection - Your Name webmap.

24. Click OK.

    > [!NOTE]
    >
    > On Portal, since the feature layers contained within the web map are not shared, users will be prompted to share them. If not shared, only the basemap layer will be visible to other users. (Owners of data can always see the layers owned but they won’t be visible to others unless they are shared.)

25. Click Update Sharing on Portal.
         Mobile Data Collection Training Lakewood Regional Office
         doimspp.sharepoint.com/sites/nps-imr-geographic-resources Geographic Resources Division
         May 2022 Page 58
        

    > [!NOTE]
    >
    > On Portal, the lock icon is replaced with a group icon for the web map and the layers contained in the map. On ArcGIS Online, the person icon is paired with the group icon for the web map and the feature layers contained in the map. The service definition file is not shared as it is not required. Refresh the web page to see the update.

26. Sign out of NPS AGOL or Portal.
      The web map is
